SQLite documentation (#604)
fermyon/developer: content/spin/sqlite-api-guide.md

title = "SQLite Storage"
template = "spin_main"
date = "2023-04-14T00:22:56Z"
enable_shortcodes = true
[extra]
url = "https://github.com/fermyon/developer/blob/main/content/spin/sqlite-api-guide.md"

---
- [Using SQLite Storage From Applications](#using-sqlite-storage-from-applications)
- [Preparing a SQLite Database](#preparing-a-sqlite-database)
- [Custom SQLite Databases](#custom-sqlite-databases)
- [Granting SQLite Database Permissions to Components](#granting-sqlite-database-permissions-to-components)

Spin provides an interface for you to persist data in a SQLite database managed by Spin. This database allows Spin developers to persist relational data across application invocations.

{{ details "Why do I need a Spin interface? Why can't I just use my own external database?" "You can absolutely still use your own external database either with the MySQL or Postgres APIs. However, if you're interested in quick, local relational storage without any infrastructure set-up then Spin's SQLite database is a great option." }}

## Using SQLite Storage From Applications

> > The SQLite API is experimental and likely to change. Do not depend on the current API for production applications.

Reviewer: Do we have any other more prominent display of the experimental nature of this feature?

| `execute` | connection, sql, parameters | - | Executes the SQL statement. Use this for SQL statements that does not return a result, such as an INSERT, UPDATE or DELETE. |
| `close` | connection | - | Close the specified `connection`. |

The exact detail of calling these operations from your application depends on your language:

{{ tabs "sdk-type" }}

{{ startTab "Rust"}}

Because the SQLite API is experimental, Rust projects must opt into it by enabling the `experimental-sqlite` SDK feature in Cargo.toml.

```toml
spin-sdk = { git = "https://github.com/fermyon/spin", tag = "v1.2.0", features = ["experimental-sqlite"] }
```

When the `experimental-sqlite` feature is enabled, SQLite functions are available in the `spin_sdk::sqlite` module. The function names match the operations above. For example:

```rust
use anyhow::Result;
use serde::Serialize;
use spin_sdk::{
    http::{Request, Response},
    http_component,
    sqlite::{DataTypeParam, Error, Connection},
};

#[http_component]
fn handle_request(req: Request) -> Result<Response> {

>     // !!!!!!!!!!!!!! TODO:

Reviewer: FYI: This is implemented now.

    // let connection = Connection::open_default()?;
    let connection = Connection::open("default")?;

    let execute_params = [
        DataTypeParam::Text("Try out Spin SQLite"),
        DataTypeParam::Text("Friday"),
    ];
    connection.execute(
        "INSERT INTO todos (description, due) VALUES (?, ?)",
        execute_params.as_slice(),
    )?;

    let rowset = connection.query(
        "SELECT id, description, due FROM todos",
        &[]
    )?;

    let todos = rowset.rows().map(|row|
        ToDo {
            id: row.get::<u32>("id").unwrap(),
            description: row.get::<&str>("description").unwrap().to_owned(),
            due: row.get::<&str>("due").unwrap().to_owned(),
        }
    );

    let body = serde_json::to_vec(&todos)?;
    Ok(http::Response::builder().status(200).body(Some(body.into()))?)
}

// Helper for returning the query results as JSON
#[derive(Serialize)]
struct ToDo {
    id: u32,
    description: String,
    due: String,
}
```

**General Notes** 

> * Parameters are instances of the `DataTypeParam` enum; you must wrap raw values in this type.

Reviewer: TODO: don't want us to forget that `DataTypeParam` has been renamed `ValueParam` and `DataTypeResult` has been renamed `ValueResult`.

* The connection object doesn't surface the `close` function.
* Errors are surfaced as exceptions.

{{ blockEnd }}

{{ startTab "TinyGo"}}

The Go SDK doesn't currently surface the SQLite API.

{{ blockEnd }}

{{ blockEnd }}

## Preparing an SQLite Database

Although Spin provides SQLite as a built-in database, SQLite still needs you to create its tables.  Although you can do this using Spin components and the SQLite API, this usually results in database setup getting uncomfortably mixed in with application logic.

Instead, you can use the `spin up --sqlite` option to run whatever SQL statements you need before your application starts.  This is typically used to create or alter tables, but can be used for whatever other maintenance or troubleshooting tasks you need.

You can run a SQL script from a file using the `@filename` syntax:

<!-- @nocpy -->

```bash
spin up --sqlite @migration.sql
```

Or you can pass SQL statements directly on the command line as a (quoted) string:

<!-- @nocpy -->

```bash
spin up --sqlite "CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS todos (id INTEGER PRIMARY KEY AUTOINCREMENT, description TEXT NOT NULL, due TEXT NOT NULL)"
```

> You can provide the `--sqlite` flag more than once; Spin runs the statements in the order you provide them.

Reviewer 2: Does it wait for the first `--sqlite` command to finish before starting the next?

## Custom SQLite Databases

Spin defines a database named `"default"` and provides automatic backing storage.  If you need to customize Spin with additional databases, or to change the backing storage for the default database, you can do so via the `--runtime-config-file` flag and the `runtime-config.toml` file.  See [SQLite Database Runtime Configuration](/spin/dynamic-configuration#sqlite-storage-runtime-configuration) for details.

## Granting SQLite Database Permissions to Components

By default, a given component of an app will not have access to any SQLite databases. Access must be granted specifically to each component via the component manifest:

> ```toml

Reviewer 2: It may be useful to add multiple components to this example, and only grant 1 access to flush out the concept a bit more for the readers.

[component]
sqlite_databases = ["default", "sales"]
```

> For example, a component could be given access to the default store using `sqlite_databases = ["default"]`.

Reviewer 2: We should also address that the component also has access to "sales" given the toml above. 

```suggestion
In the example above, our component has been given access to the default store and a custom store named `sales` using `sqlite_databases = ["default", "sales"]`
```

Author: That's not what this was trying to say but yeah, it had come dreadfully adrift from its intent.  I'm reorganising the section to be clearer.
